# nn_final
Abstract

Alzheimer’s Disease (AD) is a progressive and neurogenerative disease characterized by hippocampal volume loss and decreased cognitive function. One of the most common signs of AD is difficulty with episodic memory. We attempt to replicate impaired episodic memory as a representation of overall cognitive decline by adjusting hippocampal volume loss in different cognitive groups: CN, MCI, and AD. In our neural network model, we provided the model with a word pair association task and recorded the time it took to train the model to perfect recall and the accuracy of the training across the cognitive groups. We predict that the CN group would learn the fastest, followed by the MCI then AD group. We found that the model did reproduce our predicted learning rate order. However, the differences in performance between groups is not as accurate when compared to actual human cognitive test scores. Our future steps include using a more expansive view of the hippocampus layout by incorporating more regions and their associated volume loss in AD, such as the Cornu ammonis (CA) and dentate gyrus.

Introduction 
Alzheimer’s disease (AD) is the main cause of dementia, a general term for memory loss and other thinking abilites that are serious enough to impact daily life. AD accounts for 60-80% of dementia cases in people 65 and older and is reported to be the sixth leading cause of death in the elderly [Arlt, 2013]. Occasional forgetfulness is a normal part of aging, but once memory loss becomes more noticeable to the person or the person’s family, this may be a sign of mild cognitive impairment (MCI). Researchers believe that MCI may be a window for therapeutic intervention to stabilize memory loss in MCI patients or to revert to cognitively normal (CN) [Arlt, 2013]. However, those with MCI are at an increased risk of developing AD. MCI is also considered a transitional state to AD, which is characterized by even more severe forms of memory loss [Arlt, 2013]. For example, missing a monthly payment or making poor decisions from time to time is still considered cognitively healthy in older adults, but continuously having problems with monthly bills or frequently making poor decision and judgements is a major warning sign for AD. 

AD is a progressive and neurogenerative disorder, meaning the dementia symptoms worsen over time as a result of the loss of tissue throughout the brain. Memory loss is not as severe in MCI or early-stage AD, but over time, memory impairment begins to disrupt everyday tasks. Studies suggest that neuronal loss in the hippocampus is initially responsible for the first signs of memory loss in AD patients [Boutet et al., 2014]. It’s thought that brain regions which have a higher metabolic rates (i.e. hippocampus) may be preferentially vulnerable to aging [Hedden et al., 2009], therefore the hippocampus seems to be more vulnerable to early neurodegeneration than less metabolically active regions, like the sensorimotor and occipital areas [Mosconi, 2013].  Unfortunately, there is no known cure for AD, but there are treatments to slow Alzheimer’s from progressing by temporarily decelerating dementia symptoms.  

Memory
Memory can be classified into two categories: implicit and explicit. Implicit memory refers to unconscious, habitual memory, such as motor learning like riding a bicycle or playing a musical instrument. Explicit memory refers to information that is intentionally recalled and recited, like reciting a house address. Furthermore, memory can also be classified into short-term and long-term memory. Short-term memory refers to retaining learned information for a short period of time, often seconds or minutes, and long-term memory refers to storing learned information over longer periods of time [Camina & Güell, 2017].
  
When new memories are formed, it goes through three stages: sensory register, short-term memory, and long-term memory. During the sensory register process, the brain receives new information from the surrounding environment, which, after a few seconds, is transferred into short-term memory. Short-term memory is when information is temporarily stored and can be consolidated into long-term memory (Figure 1) [Camina & Güell, 2017]. Biologically, this consolidation process is expressed by the creation of new synapses or strengthening of pre-existing synapses. It’s thought that the hippocampus is the region where short-term memories are consolidated into long-term memories [Hartley et al., 2007]. 

One of the most common signs of AD is difficultly with episodic memory, which is a category of long-term explicit memory. Episodic memory is important for cognitive function that helps the ability to create a concept of past and future and essential to avoid poor decision making. Studies have demonstrated that a decrease in hippocampal volume also contributes to diminished memory (i.e. episodic memory), since memory consolidation typically happens in the hippocampus [Borlikova et al., 2013]. 

Hypothesis
Using episodic memory as a cognitive function sample to test overall cognitive ability, we built a network to demonstrate impairments in episodic memory in three different groups: CN, MCI, and AD. We lesioned the hidden layer to mimic the overall neuronal loss in the hippocampus. Based on this study [Schuff et al., 2009], we established the baseline CN volume to be 2133 mm3, which is indicated by 0% lesioning. The MCI and AD volumes were determined to be 1846 and 1631 mm3, indicated by 15% and 25% lesioning, respectively. The network was given a task to learn a list of arbitrarily paired words (AB list), then the network was trained until it achieved perfect recall. These tasks were performed under each lesioning condition to determine the impact on accuracy and time to learn the AB task. We predict that the CN condition will learn the word pairs the fastest, the MCI condition will take a longer time, and the AD condition will the take longest time, or cannot learn the word pairs at all. 

Design
Our model is built off the source code from the “abac” simulation from Chapter 8. The original “abac” simulation explores the AB-AC pair associate list learning task in a cortical-like network, which reveals high levels of interference. The AB and AC list were similar in that the A items in both lists were the same, but the associated word was different. The network trained on the AB list until it reached perfect recall, then switched to training the AC list until it also reached zero error. The results of the associate list learning task demonstrated the interference of recalling the AB list as a result of learning the AC list. 
 
The network is set up with 4 layers: input, context, hidden and output (Figure 2). The input layer represents the first word of each pair and the output layer represents the paired associated word. The context layer represents an internal representation of the word pair that serves to disambiguate the two lists and acts as a stimulus to trigger working memory. Both the input and context layer project to the 10 by 15 hidden layer and the hidden and output layer are bidirectionally connected. We chose to modify the “abac” simulation because the foundation of the simulation lies on episodic memory. Since episodic memory is one of the first cognitive functions to be affected by early AD, the “abac” simulation seemed to be a good starting point to build our network. 

Although we kept the network layout the same (the layers and connections), we made two major adjustments. The first adjustment is eliminating the AC list learning task entirely. The aim of building this network is to determine what happens to training time and accuracy when the hidden layer is lesioned. To achieve this, we wanted the network just to focus on the AB list learning task, and use the results from this task to compare the training rates and accuracies across the different cognitive groups. 

The second adjustment is lesioning the hidden layer. The hidden layer represents the hippocampus where short-term memories are consolidated into long-term memories, such as episodic memories. As mentioned before, the hidden layer was lesioned by 0% for cognitively normal (CN), 15% for mild cognitive impairment (MCI) and 25% for the Alzheimer’s Disease (AD) cognitive group to simulate the neuronal loss from neurodegeneration in MCI and AD patients (Figure 3). Lesioning the hidden layer reduces the number of units that are active and results in slower learning rates, meant to demonstrate the difficulty of consolidating short term-memories into episodic memories. Changes in the “abac” simulation source code were made on line 1327-1352.
 
Methods
To run the program, you can start by clicking “Init” in the top left corner in the toolbar, then click on the “LesionCN” button on the far-right side of the toolbar to start with the cognitively normal group. Click on “Step Trial” for a few iterations of training. Then click on the “TrnEcPlot” tab to see a plot of training performance, and do “Step Run”. You will see that the plot is updated as the network is trained on the AB list. The “PctErr” line shows the errors made by the network. The network will continue training until it reaches zero percent error or trains for 100 epochs, whichever comes first. 

To gather more statistics, click “Train” to complete a run of 10 “subjects” and click on “RunPlot” to see a plot of training performance. Then click the “RunStats” “etable.Table” in the left control panel to see a summary of statistics across the 10 runs, including the mean, min, median and max firstZero (when the network first reaches zero percent error). 

To collect data on the other cognitive groups, exit out of the application and repeat these steps, but change which lesioning button you click (“LesionMCI” or “LesionAD”). Unfortunately, the “Unlesion” button does not work, so please do not use the button when running the network because it will produce different results that the ones reported. 

Results
The percent error for each cognitive condition reached 0%, but all at different times (Figure 4). For the CN condition, it took on average 10.3 epochs over 10 subjects to reach 0% error, with a minimum of 7 epochs and a maximum of 13 epochs (Table 1). For the MCI condition, this training took an average of 14 epochs to reach 0% error, with a minimum of 12 epochs and a maximum of 20 epochs (Table 1). Lastly, for the AD condition, it took on average 16.4 epochs to reach 0% error, with a minimum of 13 epochs and a maximum of 20 epochs (Table 1).

Discussion
Our model demonstrated how lesioning the hidden layer in accordance to hippocampal volume loss from different cognitive groups can impact the time it takes for the network to learn the AB task. By lesioning the hidden layer by 15% to indicate the hippocampal loss in MCI patients, the network took about 35% longer to learn the AB task than the CN group. When lesioning by 25% to demonstrate the hippocampal loss in AD patients, the network took about 60% longer than the CN group and about 17% longer than the MCI group to learn the AB task. These calculations were based off the average first zeros of each cognitive group. Furthermore, lesioning the hidden layer to this extent did not affect the overall accuracy since the network did reach 0% error across all cognitive groups. 

We interpreted these findings as a CN patient may only need to repeat the first line of the AB list to themselves 5 times to fully consolidate the word pair into episodic memory, but an AD patient may need to repeat the same line an extra 3 times to reach the same level of memory consolidation. Our results correspond with studies that have shown evidence of a correlation between hippocampal volume and MMSE cognitive performances in patients with MCI and AD [Peng et al., 2015]. 

The Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE) is a cognitive function test commonly used among the elderly to assess the severity of someone’s dementia or Alzheimer’s. The MMSE includes tests of orientation, attention, memory, language and visual-spatial skills. The highest score on the MMSE is 30 points. A score between 20 and 24 indicates mild dementia, 13 to 20 suggests moderate dementia, and less than 12 indicates severe dementia [DementiaCareCentral.com, 2020]. Researchers have found, at baseline, that the average cognitively normal elderly person scored around a 28.9 on the MMSE, which is about 4% better than the average MCI patient (MMSE score = 27.7) and about 25% better than the average AD patient (MMSE score = 21.5). In addition, the average MCI patient performs about 22% better than the average AD patient [Peng et al., 2015]. The percent differences in these scores are significantly smaller than the percent differences in the average first zeros of each cognitive group produced by the network. The network cannot successfully predict the degree of diminished episodic memory and cognitive impairment in relation to a given amount of hippocampal volume loss. However, the network has successfully demonstrated the overall correlation between decreased hippocampal volume, represented by a lesioned hidden layer, and slower episodic memory, therefore lower cognitive function.  

Limitations were present in this project. When determining the differences in training time between each cognitive group, the percent differences may be skewed, since our network is based off the pre-written code of the “abac” simulation. The “abac” simulation includes inhibition of the hidden layer. All cognitive groups in this project were trained with hidden layer inhibition = 1.8. When combining hidden layer inhibition and hidden layer lesioning, we may be impairing the hidden layer activation more than what we expected, meaning when we lesion the hidden layer by 15%, we may be decreasing activation more than 15%. This indicates that the reported learning rates for each cognitive group could appear slower than lesioning at exactly 15% or 25% would report.

Future action will be aimed at exploring how APoE4 carrier status can be incorporated into this network and if carrier status interacts and moderates the relationship between hippocampal volume loss and episodic memory. The ε4 allele of apolipoprotein E (APoE) is a major genetic risk factor for AD. The APoE protein circulates through the bloodstream, regulating cholesterol and lipid metabolism. Of the APoE isomers, APoE4 is the least effective in clearing cholesterol in the brain, resulting in plaque buildup and APoE2 has shown to have protective effects. For example, amyloid plaques, which are composed of the amyloid-β (Aβ) peptide, are linked to the decreased clearing effects of the APoE4 gene, which are hypothesized to initiate the process of cognitive decline seen in AD [Kim et al., 2009].

Furthermore, we may also elaborate the model more, by including more specific regions of the hippocampus. For example, the hippocampus has two major regions: the Cornu ammonis (CA) and dentate gyrus. The CA is further divided into sub regions CA1-4. It’s thought that the CA1 is the first region within the hippocampus to experience early neurodegeneration, which may contribute to cognitive decline [Boutet et al., 2014]. In future projects, we could include all regions of the hippocampus and determine how lesioning the CA1 region can impact the network’s learning time and accuracy on the AB task. 
